MPRECISE PROBABILITY: GENERAL IDEAS AND STATISTICAL APPROACHES

Imprecise or interval probability aims to model uncertainty more comprehensively than approaches based on (precise) probability distributions alone, acknowledging that uncertainty in probability statements themselves needs to be addressed. Often, two kinds of uncertainty are distinguished, namely aleatoric unertainty and epistemic uncertainty. To illustrate, uncertainty about outcomes of a toss of a fair coin is aleatoric, whereas epistemic uncertainty arises when the probability of "heads" is uncertain; in questions of risk and reliability, usually both kinds of uncertainty are present. In this talk I will focus on the Bayesian framework and show that generalizing it to impecise probability by using sets of priors allows to adequately model vague and partial expert information. In particular, situations of prior-data conflict and weak expert information profit from the switch to imprecise probability.


NONPARAMETRIC BAYESIAN SYSTEM RELIABILITY USING SETS OF PRIORS

The survival signature allows to efficiently calculate the reliability function for complex technical systems consisting of multiple types of components. This approach requires a model for the reliability of each component type. Data on component failures is however often scarce, and to obtain meaningful estimates for the reliability of a component, and in turn of the system, it is often necessary to include expert information in the analysis. With a Bayesian approach this can be done in a straightforward way by using an informative prior. For a nonparametric model of component survival, we consider a grid of time points. At each time point, the number of components that still function can be understood as binomially distributed with a certain functioning probability, and expert information can be expressed via a prior distribution over this functioning probability. Such a model is, however, insensitive to prior-data conflict: when one observes data that are very surprising from the viewpoint of the expert, this is not reflected in the spread of the posterior distribution, conveying a false sense of certainty. Modeling expert information instead via sets of priors simplifies elicitation and allows to express the precision of expert information by the magnitude of the set of priors. The corresponding set of posterior system reliability functions reflects prior precision, the amount of data, and the extent of prior-data conflict.


GERO WALTER holds a Diplom (equivalent to a MSc) in Statistics from Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (Germany), and received his Doctorate in Statistics at the same university in 2013. In his PhD thesis, he focused on prior-data conflict situations, i.e., when information from data is in conflict with prior assumptions stemming, e.g., from expert knowledge. Realising that a large class of Bayesian methods ignore this conflict and so convey a false sense of certainty to the user, he developed a framework for cautious (conflict-aware) uncertainty modelling that generalises the Bayesian approach towards imprecise probability. After his PhD, he worked for a year at Durham University (UK) as a Temporary Lecturer, teaching courses on Bayesian Statistics and Decision Theory. Since February 2015, Gero is a postdoctoral researcher at Eindhoven University of Technology (Netherlands) in the group "Operations, Planning, Accounting and Control". In the project "Coordinated Advance Maintenance and Logistics Planning for the Process Industries", sponsored by TKI Dinalog (the Dutch institute for advanced logistics), he collaborates with a number of companies, working on statistical methods in reliability analysis and maintenance planning. He received an IJAR Young Researcher Award in 2011, and has won several "best poster" awards.
